Comics Project Aims To Offer Hope To Syrian Refugee Kids

The war in Syria is taking a toll on everyone in the region, but for the estimated 50% of refugees under age 12 growing up amidst the violence and displacement, the uncertainties of daily life can be unbearable. Now a non-profit is looking to harness the power of comics to offer a small but tangible comfort to refugee children who have lost everything.

The organization, Arlington, MA-based Comics for Youth Refugees Incorporated Collective (CYRIC), has produced an all-ages comic called Haawiyat, employing the talents of a multinational team of creators and translators (English version here). The comic features well-known Syrian folk tales illustrated in a variety of kid-friendly styles by Rob Croonenborghs, Sajad Shah, Jim Shaw, Joseba Morales, and Ursula Murray Husted. Taylor Hastings's Ghost Glyph Studios handled the lettering and Farrah Hamza translated the text into Arabic.


ADVERTISING

The stories in the comic were created in conjunction with mental health professionals and onsite experts, according to CYRIC. "Haawiyat consists of timeless Syrian folklore adapted into comics form and cultivated for its potential healing content," said Project Leader A. David Lewis. "These tales, in standard Arabic for readers ages 6-12 or with supervision, are intended to deliver some measure of solace or narrative stability in their current situations."

Lewis said the goal is to restore some small sense of value or control to children who have lost everything. We in the west tend to view the Syrian conflict through the lens of geopolitics and ideology, but CYRIC's mission is to bring focus to the problems of the most vulnerable population.

"For phase one, all production and services were donated or volunteered," explained Lewis. "In phase two, we hope the expanded incarnation of the title will have more stories, be in full color, AND go out to many more deserving children!" Costs of production and distribution for phase two will be the ultimate goal of the upcoming Razoo campaign.

The organization is also looking for artists and writers interested in participating in the ongoing efforts, and partners to improve production and distribution.
